First draft, color space announcement (#1170)
sass/sass-site: source/blog/042-wide-gamut-colors-in-sass.md

<img src="/assets/img/blog/042-blue-yellow.jpg" alt="on the left a blue and much brighter yellow, on the right our yellow is much darker to match the blue tone" width=753 height=209 />

## New CSS formats give us the choice

Moving forward, there are two directions we could go with wide gamut colors:

- Color formats that re-fit larger and larger gamuts into simple coordinates, stretching the colors to preserve clean, geometric boundaries.
- Color formats that maintain their *perceptually uniform* spacing, without any regard for specific gamuts.

On the one hand, clean boundaries allow us to easily stay inside the range of available colors. Without those boundaries, it would be easy to *accidentally* request colors that aren't even physically possible. On the other hand, we expect these colors to be *perceived* by *other humans* -- and we need to make things *look* consistent, with enough contrast to be readable.

> The [CSS Color Module Level 4](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/) defines a number of new CSS color formats. Some of them maintain geometric access to specific color spaces. The `hwb()` function has been around for several years now, and defines `sRGB` colors using `hue`, `whiteness`, and `blackness` channels.  It's an interesting format, and [I've written about it before](https://www.miriamsuzanne.com/2022/06/29/hwb-clamping/).

Reviewer: The transition to talking about `hwb()` here feels a bit abrupt. Maybe a bridge sentence like "You're probably already familiar with the `rgb()` and `hsl()` functions." would help?

The rest of the gamut-bounded spaces are available using the `color(<space> <3-channels> / <alpha>)` function. Using that syntax we can define colors in `sRGB`, `srbg-linear`, `display-p3` (common for modern monitors), `a98-rgb`, `prophoto-rgb`, and `rec2020`. Each of these maps the specified gamut onto a range of (cubic) coordinates from `0-1` or `0%-100%`. Nice and clean.

In the same `color()` function, we can also access the 'device independent' (and gamut-less) `xyz` color spaces -- often used as an international baseline for converting between different color models. I won't get into [white points](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#white-point) here, but we can specify `xyz-d65` (the default) explicitly, or use `xyz-d50` instead.

> Working out from `xyz`, we get a number of new *theoretically unbounded* color formats -- prioritizing *perceptually uniform* distribution over clean geometry. These are available in functions of their own, including `lab()` (`lightness`, `a`, and `b`) and `lch()` (`lightness`, `chroma`, and `hue`) along with the newer 'ok' versions of each -- `oklab()` and `oklch()`. If you want the full history of these formats, [Eric Portis has written a great explainer](https://ericportis.com/posts/2024/okay-color-spaces/).

Reviewer: Nit, just to avoid confusion with "working out" as a verb in itself

```suggestion
Working outwards from `xyz`, we get a number of new *theoretically unbounded* color formats -- prioritizing *perceptually uniform* distribution over clean geometry. These are available in functions of their own, including `lab()` (`lightness`, `a`, and `b`) and `lch()` (`lightness`, `chroma`, and `hue`) along with the newer 'ok' versions of each -- `oklab()` and `oklch()`. If you want the full history of these formats, [Eric Portis has written a great explainer](https://ericportis.com/posts/2024/okay-color-spaces/).
```

## TL;DR top priority new formats

For the color experts, it's great to have all this flexibility. For the rest of us, there are a few stand-out formats:

- `color(display-p3 …)` provides access to a wider gamut of colors, which are available on many modern displays, while maintaining a clear set of gamut boundaries.

> - `oklch(…)` is the most intuitive and perceptually uniform space to work in, a newer alternative to `hsl(…)` -- `chroma` is very similar to `saturation`. But there are no guard rails here, and it's easy to end up outside the gamuts that any screen can display, or even outside the realm of physical reality.

Reviewer: I feel like "outside physical reality" might be too scary here. As long as users stay within normal lightness and saturation ranges, these should all at least be _theoretically_ meaningful colors, right?

Author: I don't know if that's guaranteed, because the range relationship `100% == 0.4` doesn't adjust based on hue/lightness, but the actual Chroma available is dependent on hue/lightness. Still, maybe 0.4 is low enough to be safe across the board? @jamesnw is looking into it.

- For transitions and gradients, if we want to go directly between hues (instead of going around the color wheel), `oklab(…)` is a good linear option. Usually, a transition or gradient between two in-gamut colors will stay in gamut -- but we can't always rely on that when we're dealing with extremes of saturation or lightness.

## CSS color functions in Sass

Sass now accepts all the new CSS formats, and treats them as first-class *colors* that we can manipulate, mix, convert, and inspect. These functions are all available globally:

- `lab()`, `oklab()`, `lch()`, and `oklch()`
-  `color()` using the `sRGB`, `srgb-linear`, `display-p3`, `a98-rgb`, `prophoto-rgb`, `rec2020`, `xyz`, `xyz-d65`, and `xyz-d50` color spaces
- `hwb()` (Sass previously had a `color.hwb()` function, which is now deprecated in favor of the global function)

The Sass color functions use the same syntax as the CSS functions, which means that a given color can be represented in a variety of different spaces. For example, these are all the same color:

> ```scss
> $named: MediumVioletRed;
> $hex: #C71585;
> $hsl: hsl(322.2 80.91% 43.14%);
> $oklch: oklch(55.34% 0.2217 349.7);
> $display-p3: color(display-p3 0.716 0.1763 0.5105);
> ```

Reviewer: Make this a proper example, maybe with `@debug`s so that it'll do something visible in the playground:

```suggestion
{% codeExample 'color-fns', false %}
  @debug MediumVioletRed;
  @debug #C71585;
  @debug hsl(322.2 80.91% 43.14%);
  @debug oklch(55.34% 0.2217 349.7);
  @debug color(display-p3 0.716 0.1763 0.5105);
  ===
  @debug MediumVioletRed
  @debug #C71585
  @debug hsl(322.2 80.91% 43.14%)
  @debug oklch(55.34% 0.2217 349.7)
  @debug color(display-p3 0.716 0.1763 0.5105)
{% endcodeExample %}
```

Same below.

## Sass colors hold their space

Historically, both CSS and Sass would treat the different color-spaces as *interchangeable*. When all the color formats describe the same color gamut using the same underlying model, you can provide a color using `hsl()` syntax, and the parser can eagerly convert it to `rgb()` without risking any data loss. That's no longer the case for modern color spaces.

In general, any color defined in a given space will remain in that space, and be emitted in that space. The space is defined by the function used, either one of the named spaced passed to `color()`, or the function name (e.g. `lab` for colors defined using the `lab()` function).

> However, the `rgb`, `hsl`, and `hwb` spaces will be considered "legacy spaces", and will often get special handling for the sake of backwards compatibility. Legacy colors will continue to be emitted in the most backwards-compatible format available. This matches CSS’s own backwards-compatibility behavior. Colors defined using hex notation or CSS color names are also considered part of the legacy `rgb` color space.

Reviewer: Nit: present tense

```suggestion
However, the `rgb`, `hsl`, and `hwb` spaces are considered "legacy spaces", and often get special handling for the sake of backwards compatibility. Legacy colors are still emitted in the most backwards-compatible format available. This matches CSS’s own backwards-compatibility behavior. Colors defined using hex notation or CSS color names are also considered part of the legacy `rgb` color space.
```

Sass provides a variety of tools for inspecting and working with these color spaces:

- We can inspect the space of a color using `color.space($color)`
- We can ask if the color is in a legacy space with `color.is-legacy($color)`
- We can *convert* a color from one space to another using `color.to-space($color, $space)`

All of these functions are provided by the built-in [Sass Color Module](https://sass-lang.com/documentation/modules/color/):

```scss
@use 'sass:color';
$brand: MediumVioletRed;

// results: rgb, true
$initial: color.space($brand);
$is-legacy: color.is-legacy($brand);

// result: oklch(55.34% 0.2217 349.7)
$converted: color.to-space($brand, 'oklch');

// results: oklch, false
$new-space: color.space($brand);
$is-legacy: color.is-legacy($brand);
```

> Once we can convert a color between spaces, we no longer consider those colors to be *equal*. But we can ask if they would render as 'the same' color, using the `color.same()` function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we convert a color between spaces, we no longer consider those colors to be *equal*. But we can ask if they would render as 'the same' color, using the `color.same()` function:
```

```scss
@use 'sass:color';
$orange-rgb: #ff5f00;
$orange-oklch: oklch(68.72% 20.966858279% 41.4189852913deg);

// result: false
$equal: $orange-rgb == $orange-oklch;

// result: true
$same: color.same($orange-rgb, $orange-oklch);
```

We can inspect the individual channels of a color using `color.channel()`. By default, it only supports channels that are available in the color's own space, but we can pass the `$space` parameter to return the value of the channel value after converting to the given space:

```scss
@use 'sass:color';
$brand: hsl(0 100% 25.1%);

// result: 25.1%
$hsl-lightness: color.channel($brand, "lightness");

// result: 37.67%
$oklch-lightness: color.channel($brand, "lightness", $space: oklch);
```

> CSS has also introduced the concept of 'powerless' and 'missing' color channels. For example, an `hsl` color with `100%` lightness will *always be white*. In that case, we can consider both the `hue` and `saturation` channels to be powerless. Changing their value won't have any impact on the resulting color. Sass allows us to ask if a channel is powerless using the `color.is-powerless()` function:

Reviewer: Actually, according to the current spec, only `0%` saturation causes the hue to become powerless. Lightness _never_ causes powerlessness. (This is actually wrong in our implementation too :cold_sweat:.)

```scss
@use 'sass:color';
$grey: hsl(0 0% 60%);

// result: true, because saturation is 0
$hue-powerless: color.is-powerless($grey, "hue");

// result: false
$hue-powerless: color.is-powerless($grey, "lightness");
```

Taking that a step farther, CSS also allows us to explicitly mark a channel as 'missing' or unknown. That can happen automatically if we convert a color like `gray` into a color space like `oklch` -- we don't have any information about the `hue`. We can also create colors with missing channels explicitly by using the `none` keyword, and inspect if a color channel is missing with the `color.is-missing()` function:

```scss
@use 'sass:color';
$brand: hsl(none 100% 25.1%);

// result: false
$missing-lightness: color.is-missing($brand, "lightness");

// result: true
$missing-hue: color.is-missing($brand, "hue");
```

> 

Reviewer: It's probably worth adding a note here that other than `is-missing()` and places where the CSS spec explicitly cares about missing channels, we treat them as though they had value 0.

```scss
@use 'sass:color';
$brand: hsl(0 100% 25.1%);

// result: hsl(0 100% 43.8%)
$hsl-lightness: color.scale($brand, $lightness: 25%);

// result: hsl(5.76 56% 45.4%)
$oklch-lightness: color.scale($brand, $lightness: 25%, $space: oklch);
```

Note that the returned color is still returned in the original color space, even when the adjustment is performed in a different space. That way we can start to use more advanced color spaces like `oklch` where they are useful, without necessarily relying on browsers to support those formats.

The existing `color.mix()` function will also maintain existing behavior *when both colors are in legacy color spaces*. Legacy mixing is always done in `rgb` space. We can opt into other mixing techniques using the new `$method` parameter, which is designed to match the CSS specification for describing [interpolation methods](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#interpolation-space) – used in CSS gradients, filters, animations, and transitions as well as the new CSS `color-mix()` function.

> For legacy colors, the method is optional. But for non-legacy colors, a method is required. In most cases, the method can simply be a color space name. But when we're using a color space with 'polar hue' channel (such as `hsl`, `hwb`, `lch`, or `oklch`) we can also specify the *direction* we want to move around the color wheel: `shorter hue`, `longer hue`, `increasing hue`, or `decreasing hue`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For legacy colors, the method is optional. But for non-legacy colors, a method is required. In most cases, the method can simply be a color space name. But when we're using a color space with "polar hue" channel (such as `hsl`, `hwb`, `lch`, or `oklch`) we can also specify the *direction* we want to move around the color wheel: `shorter hue`, `longer hue`, `increasing hue`, or `decreasing hue`:
```

```scss
@use 'sass:color';

// result: #660099
$legacy: color.mix(red, blue, 40%);

> // result: ???

Reviewer: `rgb(176.2950613593, -28.8924497904, 159.1757183525)`

> $lab: color.mix(red, blue, 40%, lab);

Reviewer: I think we should encourage users to use a named parameter for `$method`.

```suggestion
$lab: color.mix(red, blue, 40%, $method: lab);
```

> // result: ???

Reviewer: `rgb(-129.55249236, 149.0291922672, 77.9649510422)`

$oklch-longer: color.mix(red, blue, 40%, oklch longer hue);
```

> In this case, the first color in the mix is considered the 'origin' color. Like the other functions above, we can use different spaces for mixing, but the result will always be returned in that origin color space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the first color in the mix is considered the "origin" color. Like the other functions above, we can use different spaces for mixing, but the result will always be returned in that origin color space.
```

- The CSS specification says that preserving `lightness` should be the highest priority, and provides an algorithm for reducing `chroma` until the color is in gamut. That's great for maintaining readable text, but it's more work for browsers, and it can be surprising when colors suddenly lose their vibrance.
- There's been some progress on a compromise approach, reducing `chroma` to get colors inside the `rec2020` gamut, and clipping from there.

Since browser behavior is still unreliable, and some color spaces (*cough* `oklch`) can easily launch us out of any available gamut, it can be helpful to do some gamut management in Sass.

We can use `color.is-in-gamut()` to test if a particular color is in a given gamut. Like our other color functions, this will default to the space the color is defined in, but we can provide a `$space` parameter to test it against a different gamut:

```scss
@use 'sass:color';
$extra-pink: color(display-p3 0.951 0.457 0.7569);

// result: true, for display-p3 gamut
$in-p3: color.is-in-gamut($extra-pink);

// result: false, for srgb gamut

> $in-srgb: color.is-in-gamut($extra-pink, srgb);

Reviewer: For consistency, I think it makes sense to always recommend `$space:` be passed by name.

```suggestion
$in-srgb: color.is-in-gamut($extra-pink, $space: srgb);
```

```

We can also use the `color.to-gamut()` function to explicitly move a color so that it is in a particular gamut. Since there are several options on the table, and no clear sense what default CSS will use long-term, this function currently requires an explicit `$method` parameter. The current options are `clip` (as is currently applied by browsers) or `local-minde` (as is currently specified):

```scss
@use 'sass:color';
$extra-pink: color(display-p3 0.951 0.457 0.7569);

// result: ???
$clip-to-srgb: color.to-gamut($extra-pink, srgb, clip);

// result: ???
$clip-to-srgb: color.to-gamut($extra-pink, srgb, local-minde);
```

> All legacy and RGB-style spaces represent bounded gamuts of color. Since mapping colors into gamut is a lossy process, it should generally be left to browsers or done with caution. For that reason, out-of-gamut channel values are maintained by Sass whenever possible, even when converting into gamut-bounded color spaces. The only exception is that `hsl` and `hwb` color spaces are not able to express out-of-gamut color, so converting colors into those spaces will gamut-map the colors as well.

Reviewer: The last sentence here is no longer true. We now preserve out-of-gamut colors _everywhere_.

- For transitions and gradients, if we want to go directly between hues (instead of going around the color wheel), `oklab(…)` is a good linear option. Usually, a transition or gradient between two in-gamut colors will stay in gamut -- but we can't always rely on that when we're dealing with extremes of saturation or lightness.

## CSS color functions in Sass

Sass now accepts all the new CSS formats, and treats them as first-class *colors* that we can manipulate, mix, convert, and inspect. These functions are all available globally:

- `lab()`, `oklab()`, `lch()`, and `oklch()`
-  `color()` using the `sRGB`, `srgb-linear`, `display-p3`, `a98-rgb`, `prophoto-rgb`, `rec2020`, `xyz`, `xyz-d65`, and `xyz-d50` color spaces
- `hwb()` (Sass previously had a `color.hwb()` function, which is now deprecated in favor of the global function)

The Sass color functions use the same syntax as the CSS functions, which means that a given color can be represented in a variety of different spaces. For example, these are all the same color:

> {% codeExample 'color-fns', false %}

Author: @nex3 Should I move all the code demos to this format?

Reviewer: Yep!

Since browser behavior is still unreliable, and some color spaces (*cough* `oklch`) can easily launch us out of any available gamut, it can be helpful to do some gamut management in Sass.

We can use `color.is-in-gamut()` to test if a particular color is in a given gamut. Like our other color functions, this will default to the space the color is defined in, but we can provide a `$space` parameter to test it against a different gamut:

```scss
@use 'sass:color';
$extra-pink: color(display-p3 0.951 0.457 0.7569);

// result: true, for display-p3 gamut
$in-p3: color.is-in-gamut($extra-pink);

// result: false, for srgb gamut
$in-srgb: color.is-in-gamut($extra-pink, $space: srgb);
```

We can also use the `color.to-gamut()` function to explicitly move a color so that it is in a particular gamut. Since there are several options on the table, and no clear sense what default CSS will use long-term, this function currently requires an explicit `$method` parameter. The current options are `clip` (as is currently applied by browsers) or `local-minde` (as is currently specified):

```scss
@use 'sass:color';
$extra-pink: color(display-p3 0.951 0.457 0.7569);

// result: ???

> $clip-to-srgb: color.to-gamut($extra-pink, srgb, clip);

Reviewer: `color(display-p3 0.930165971 0.4548604319 0.7563239804)`

// result: ???

> $map-to-srgb: color.to-gamut($extra-pink, srgb, local-minde);

Reviewer: `color(display-p3 0.930165971 0.4548604319 0.7563239804)`, same as above :/

  $orange-oklch: oklch(68.72% 20.966858279% 41.4189852913deg);

  // result: false
  @debug $orange-rgb == $orange-oklch;

  // result: true
  @debug color.same($orange-rgb, $orange-oklch);
  ===
  @use 'sass:color'
  $orange-rgb: #ff5f00
  $orange-oklch: oklch(68.72% 20.966858279% 41.4189852913deg)

  // result: false
  @debug $orange-rgb == $orange-oklch

  // result: true
  @debug color.same($orange-rgb, $orange-oklch)
{% endcodeExample %}

We can inspect the individual channels of a color using `color.channel()`. By default, it only supports channels that are available in the color's own space, but we can pass the `$space` parameter to return the value of the channel value after converting to the given space:

{% codeExample 'color-fns', false %}
  @use 'sass:color';
  $brand: hsl(0 100% 25.1%);

  // result: 25.1%
  @debug color.channel($brand, "lightness");

  // result: 37.67%
  @debug color.channel($brand, "lightness", $space: oklch);
  ===
  @use 'sass:color'
  $brand: hsl(0 100% 25.1%)

  // result: 25.1%
  @debug color.channel($brand, "lightness")

  // result: 37.67%
  @debug color.channel($brand, "lightness", $space: oklch)
{% endcodeExample %}

> CSS has also introduced the concept of 'powerless' and 'missing' color channels. For example, an `hsl` color with `0%` saturation will *always be grayscale*. In that case, we can consider both the `hue` and `saturation` channels to be powerless. Changing their value won't have any impact on the resulting color. Sass allows us to ask if a channel is powerless using the `color.is-powerless()` function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CSS has also introduced the concept of 'powerless' and 'missing' color channels. For example, an `hsl` color with `0%` saturation will *always be grayscale*. In that case, we can consider the `hue` channel to be powerless. Changing its value won't have any impact on the resulting color. Sass allows us to ask if a channel is powerless using the `color.is-powerless()` function:
```
